DOC: NEP 37: A dispatch protocol for NumPy-like modules (#15197)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0037-array-module.rst

===================================================
NEP 37 — A dispatch protocol for NumPy-like modules
===================================================

:Author: Stephan Hoyer <shoyer@google.com>
:Author: Hameer Abbasi
:Author: Sebastian Berg
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-12-29

Abstact
-------

> NEP-18's `__array_function__` has been a mixed success. Some projects (e.g., dask, CuPy, xarray, sparse) have enthusiastically adopted it. Others (e.g., PyTorch, JAX, SciPy) have been more reluctant. Here we propose a new protocol, ``__array_module__``, that we expect could eventually subsume most use-cases for ``__array_function__``.  The protocol requires explicit adoption by both users and library authors, which ensures backwards compatibility, and is also significantly simpler than ``__array_function__``, both of which we expect will make it easier to adopt.

Reviewer: Could add Pint here to projects that have adopted `__array_function__`?

Author: Yes, done!

2. **Limitations on what can be overridden.** ``__array_function__`` has some important gaps, most notably array creation and coercion functions:

    - **Array creation** routines (e.g., ``np.arange`` and those in ``np.random``) need some other mechanism for indicating what type of arrays to create. `NEP 36 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/14715>`_ proposed adding optional ``like=`` arguments to functions without existing array arguments. However, we still lack any mechanism to override methods on objects, such as those needed by ``np.random.RandomState``.
    - **Array conversion** can't reuse the existing coercion functions like ``np.asarray``, because ``np.asarray`` sometimes means "convert to an exact ``np.ndarray``" and other times means "convert to something _like_ a NumPy array." This led to the `NEP 30 <https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0030-duck-array-protocol.html>`_ proposal for a separate ``np.duckarray`` function, but this still does not resolve how to cast one duck array into a type matching another duck array.

``get_array_module`` and the ``__array_module__`` protocol
----------------------------------------------------------

> We propose a new user-facing mechanism for dispatching to a duck-array implementation, ``numpy.get_array_module``. ``get_array_module`` performs the type resolution dance of ``__array_function__``, returning a module with an API promised to match the standard interface of ``numpy`` that can implement operations on all provided array types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We propose a new user-facing mechanism for dispatching to a duck-array implementation, ``numpy.get_array_module``. ``get_array_module`` performs the same type resolution as ``__array_function__`` and returns a module with an API promised to match the standard interface of ``numpy`` that can implement operations on all provided array types.
```

> The protocol itself is both simpler and more powerful than ``__array_function__``, because it doesn't need to worry about actually implementing functions. We believe it resolves most of thje maintainability and functionality limitations of ``__array_function__``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The protocol itself is both simpler and more powerful than ``__array_function__``, because it doesn't need to worry about actually implementing functions. We believe it resolves most of the maintainability and functionality limitations of ``__array_function__``.
```

                return NotImplemented

NumPy's internal machinery
==========================

The type resolution rules of ``get_array_module`` follow the same model as Python and NumPy's existing dispatch protocols: subclasses are called before super-classes, and otherwise left to right. ``__array_module__`` is guaranteed to be called only  a single time on each unique type.

The actual implementation of `get_array_module` will be in C, but should be equivalent to this Python code:

.. code::python

    def get_array_module(*arrays, default=numpy):
        arrays, types = _implementing_arrays_and_types(arrays)
        if not implementing_arrays and default is not None:
            return default
        for array in implementing_arrays:
            module = array.__array_module__(types)
            if module is not NotImplemented:
                return module
        raise TypeError("no common array module found")

    def _implementing_arrays_and_types(relevant_arrays):
        types = []
        implementing_arrays = []
        for array in arrays:
            t = type(array)
            if t not in types and hasattr(t, '__array_module__'):
                types.append(t)

>                 implementing_arrays.append(array)

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a comment that the (stable) sorting by `issubclass`  is missing here.

However, ``__array_module__`` and ``__array_function__`` are pretty different from a user perspective: it requires explicit calls to ``get_array_function``, rather than simply reusing original ``numpy`` functions. This is probably fine for *libraries* that rely on duck-arrays, but may be frustratingly verbose for interactive use.

Some of the dispatching use-cases for ``__array_ufunc__`` are also solved by ``__array_module__``, but not all of them. For example, it is still useful to be able to define non-NumPy ufuncs (e.g., from Numba or SciPy) in a generic way on non-NumPy arrays (e.g., with dask.array).

Given their existing adoption and distinct use cases, we don't think it makes sense to remove or deprecate ``__array_function__`` and ``__array_ufunc__`` at this time.

Mixin classes to implement ``__array_function__`` and ``__array_ufunc__``
=========================================================================

Despite the user-facing differences, ``__array_module__`` and a module implementing NumPy's API still contain sufficient functionality needed to implement dispatching with the existing duck array protocols.

> To make it easier to write duck arrays, we plan to add mixin classes (into ``numpy.lib.mixins``) that provide sensible defaults for these special methods in terms of ``get_array_module`` and ``__array_module__``, e.g.,

Reviewer 2: Seems OK to me, but if anyone is unsure about it, it would probably OK to just have the code sample.

Requesting restricted subsets of NumPy's API
============================================

Over time, NumPy has accumulated a very large API surface, with over 600 attributes in the top level ``numpy`` module alone. It is unlikely that any duck array library could or would want to implement all of these functions and classes, because the frequently used subset of NumPy is much smaller.

We think it would be useful exercise to define "minimal" subset(s) of NumPy's API, omitting rarely used or non-recommended functionality. For example, minimal NumPy might include ``stack``, but not the other stacking funtions ``column_stack``, ``dstack``, ``hstack`` and ``vstack``. This could clearly indicate to duck array authors and users want functionality is core and what functionality they can skip.

Support for requesting a restricted subset of NumPy's API would be a natural feature to include in  ``get_array_function`` and ``__array_module__``, e.g.,

.. code:: python

    # array_module is only guranteed to contain "minimal" NumPy
    array_module = np.get_array_module(*arrays, request='minimal')

> To facilitate testing with NumPy and use with any valid duck array library, NumPy itself would return restricted versions of the ``numpy`` module when ``get_array_module`` is called only on NumPy arrays. Omited functions would simply not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To facilitate testing with NumPy and use with any valid duck array library, NumPy itself would return restricted versions of the ``numpy`` module when ``get_array_module`` is called only on NumPy arrays. Omitted functions would simply not exist.
```

> Unfortuntely, we have not yet figured out what these restricted subsets should be, so it doesn't make sense to do this yet. When/if we do, we could either add new keyword arguments to ``get_array_module`` or add new top level functions, e.g., ``get_minimal_array_module``. We would also need to add a new protocol patterned off of ``__array_module__`` (e.g., ``__array_module_minimal__``), because passing new arguments into methods is not backwards compatible. (We could anticipate this need by adding placeholder arguments into  ``__array_module__``, but it probably isn't worth the trouble.)

Reviewer 2: It might be possible to just say that if the keyword argument is not accepted, `"full"` is assumed to be supported. If we want to transition there, it would require a `try/except` clause at some point (giving a deprecation warning when passing the kwarg fails). That probably is viable...

Instead of supporting dispatch only via unique array types, we could also support dispatch via array objects, e.g., by passing an ``arrays`` argument as part of the ``__array_module__`` protocol. This could potentially be useful for dispatch for arrays with metadata, such provided by Dask and Pint, but would impose costs in terms of type safety and complexity.

For example, a library that supports arrays on both CPUs and GPUs might decide on which device to create a new arrays from functions like ``ones`` based on input arguments:

.. code:: python

    class Array:
        def __array_module__(self, types, arrays):
            useful_arrays = tuple(a in arrays if isinstance(a, Array))
            if not useful_arrays:
                return NotImplemented
            prefer_gpu = any(a.prefer_gpu for a in useful_arrays)
            return ArrayModule(prefer_gpu)

    class ArrayModule:
        def __init__(self, prefer_gpu):
            self.prefer_gpu = prefer_gpu
        
        def __getattr__(self, name):
            import base_module
            base_func = getattr(base_module, name)
            return functools.partial(base_func, prefer_gpu=self.prefer_gpu)

> This might be useful, but it's not clear if we really need it. Pint seems to get along OK without any explicit array creation routines, and for the most part Dask is also OK with existing ``__array_function__`` style overides. Choosing whether to place an array on the CPU or GPU could be solved by making array creation lazy.

Reviewer 3: I guess I don't really understand this... If the user, nowhere in their code, specified a `prefer_gpu` flag, then this wouldn't work with `__array_module__` and they'd have to use `ArrayModule` (from the example) explicitly.

`sparse` would need this to determine, for example, the `compressed_axes` in `GCXS`, and other envisioned features as well.

Author: Concretely, let's consider `torch.ones`: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/torch.html#torch.ones

Currently, it is always an in memory tensor, either on CPU or GPUs. The nature is controlled either explicitly by the `device` argument or implicitly by a global "current device".

Another (hypothetical) way to handle this would be to make `torch.ones` return some sort of "lazy tensor" object (like those from dask), which only allocates memory on a particular device when the values are required, e.g., based on the devices of other arrays that are involved in the operation. This probably isn't always the best design, but in some cases it would make sense.

Author: I added a link to a JAX pull request that implement this: https://github.com/google/jax/pull/1668

> This might be useful, but it's not clear if we really need it. Pint seems to get along OK without any explicit array creation routines, and for the most part Dask is also OK with existing ``__array_function__`` style overides. Choosing whether to place an array on the CPU or GPU could be solved by making array creation lazy.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this aids the commentary here or not, but I agree that this is true for Pint, since the typical way of constructing a Pint Quantity is multiplying a bare array by a unit, as in

```python
q = np.ones(5) * ureg.m
```

so most explicit array creation routines (expect for perhaps `np.full`, where dispatch on `fill_value` could be useful) are unnecessary.

Author: Thanks, I added this as an example.

.. _appendix-design-choices:

Appendix: design choices for API overrides
------------------------------------------

There is a large range of possible design choices for overriding NumPy's API. Here we discuss three major axes of the design decision that guided our design for ``__array_module__``.

Opt-in vs. opt-out for users
============================

The ``__array_ufunc__`` and ``__array_function__`` protocols provide a mechanism for overriding NumPy functions *within NumPy's existing namespace*. This means that users need to explicitly opt-out if they do not want any overriden behavior, e.g., by casting arrays with ``np.asarray()``.

> In theory, this approach lowers the barrier for adopting these protocols in user code and libraries, because code that using the standard NumPy namespace is automatically compatible. But in practice, this hasn't worked out. For example, most well-maintained libraries that use NumPy follow the best practice of casting all inputs with ``np.asarray()``, which they would have to explicitly relax to use ``__array_function__``. Our experience has been that making a library compatible with a new duck array type typically requires at least a small amount of work to accomodate differences in the data model and operations that can be implemented efficiently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In theory, this approach lowers the barrier for adopting these protocols in user code and libraries, because code that uses the standard NumPy namespace is automatically compatible. But in practice, this hasn't worked out. For example, most well-maintained libraries that use NumPy follow the best practice of casting all inputs with ``np.asarray()``, which they would have to explicitly relax to use ``__array_function__``. Our experience has been that making a library compatible with a new duck array type typically requires at least a small amount of work to accomodate differences in the data model and operations that can be implemented efficiently.
```

Explicit vs. implicit choice of implementation
==============================================

Both ``__array_ufunc__`` and ``__array_function__`` have implicit control over dispatching: the dispatched functions are determined via the appropriate protocols in every function call. This generalizes well to handling many different types of objects, as evidenced by its use for implementing arithmetic operators in Python, but it has two downsides:

1. *Speed*: it imposes additional overhead in every function call, because each function call needs to inspect each of its arguments for overrides. This is why arithmetic on builtin Python numbers is slow.
2. *Readability*: it is not longer immediately evident to readers of code what happens when a function is called, because the function's implementation could be overriden by any of its arguments.

In contrast, importing a new library (e.g., ``import  dask.array as da``) with an API matching NumPy is entirely explicit. There is no overhead from dispatch or ambiguity about which implementation is being used.

> Explicit and implicit choice of implementations are not mutually exclusive options. Indeed, every implementation of NumPy API overrides via ``__array_function__`` that we are familiar with (namely, dask, CuPy and sparse) also includes an explicit way to use their version of NumPy's API by importing a module directly (``dask.array``, ``cupy`` or ``sparse``, respectively).

Reviewer: Pint does not have such an explicit module at this point in time, so would it make sense to change this?

```suggestion
Explicit and implicit choice of implementations are not mutually exclusive options. Indeed, most implementations of NumPy API overrides via ``__array_function__`` that we are familiar with (namely, dask, CuPy and sparse, but not Pint) also include an explicit way to use their version of NumPy's API by importing a module directly (``dask.array``, ``cupy`` or ``sparse``, respectively).
```

Author: yes, thanks!

1. **Maintainability concerns**. `__array_function__` has significant implications for libraries that use it:

    - Projects like `PyTorch <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/22402>`_, `JAX <https://github.com/google/jax/issues/1565>`_ and even `scipy.sparse <https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/10362>`_ have been reluctant to implement `__array_function__` in part because they are concerned about **breaking existing code**: users expect NumPy functions like ``np.concatenate`` to return NumPy arrays. This is a fundamental limitation of the ``__array_function__`` design, which we chose to allow overriding the existing ``numpy`` namespace. 
    - ``__array_function__`` currently requires an "all or nothing" approach to implementing NumPy's API. There is no good pathway for **incremental adoption**, which is particularly problematic for established projects for which adopting ``__array_function__`` would result in breaking changes.
    - It is no longer possible to use **aliases to NumPy functions** within modules that support overrides. For example, both CuPy and JAX set ``result_type = np.result_type``.

>     - Implementing **fall-back mechanisms** for unimplemented NumPy functions by using NumPy's implementation is hard to get right (although dask has tried), because ``__array_function__`` does not present a consistent interface.

Author: added a sentence of clarification, and a link

>     - Implementing **fall-back mechanisms** for unimplemented NumPy functions by using NumPy's implementation is hard to get right (although dask has tried), because ``__array_function__`` does not present a consistent interface.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for clarifying @shoyer, I genuinely had forgotten about this.

===================================================
NEP 37 — A dispatch protocol for NumPy-like modules
===================================================

:Author: Stephan Hoyer <shoyer@google.com>
:Author: Hameer Abbasi
:Author: Sebastian Berg
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-12-29

> Abstact

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Abstract
```

> -------

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
--------
```
